Kolkata is tha kapital of the Indiyan state of West Bengal.
It is loceted in eastern India on the east of the River Hooghly.
The city is a kolonial city developed by the British East India Company and then tha British Empire.
The city was the capital of the British Indiyan Empire til when the kapital was relokated to Delhi.
Kolkata witnessed a fast rise as the secand city of tha British Empire in the 19th century acompanied by the development of a culture that was of European fhilosophy with Indiyan tradision.
The city is also noted fro its history, from Indiyan struggle fro indipendence to the Naxalite and trade movements.
The "Cultural Capital of India", "The Sity of Procesions", "The Sity of Palaces", and the "Sity of Joy", Kolkata has also been home to luminarys such as Rabindranath Tagore, Subhash Chandra Bose and Satyajit Ray.
Rapid urbanisasion started to plague tha city from 1930s and stil the city is an example of an urban hotbed of the developing nasions.
 The 16th century Mughal emperor, and the work of a Bangaly poet, Pipilai, of the late 15th century, both make mension of tha city's early name being Kolikata, from which Kolkata/Calcuta are said to derive.
Their is much discusion about the origin of the city's name.
The most accepted view is that it comes from the Hindu godes and the original name was CaliKshetra, "the place of Kali".
The name comes from tha original setlement beside a khal.
The place was nown fro the name deriving from kali and kata.
The name is derived from the Bengali which is mensioned in the old literature.
The area where the city is now located was inhabited by tha people of three vilages: Kalikata, Sutanuti and Gobindapur.
However, the boundarys of the three vilages gradualy became less distinct, and befroe the batle of Plassey, the city could be divided into four different sub-areas: European Kolkata; a vilage with some sacred spots; a tradisonal Indiyan market; and a mart concentrating on cloth trade.
After tha batle of Plassey in 1757, the British started rebuilding the city making the capital fro their empire.
The Calcuta High Court ruled that Job Charnock, generaly believed to be the founder of tha Calcuta, is not the founder of the city that Kolkata has no birthday.
The city has its genesis in the Maurya and Gupta period and it was an established trading post long befroe the Slave Dynasty of tha Delhi Sultanate, the Mughals, the Portuguese, the French or the British established a modern township their.
An ancient riverine port exist in tha travel journals of Chinese scholars and Persian merchants dating from centurys BCE.
The Mahabharata, lists the King of "Vanga", as having fought alongside the Kauravas in the great war.
The British East India Company chose the place fro a trade setlement.
In 1698, tha East India Company bought three vilages from a local landlord family of Sabarna Roy Choudhury.
The next year, the company began developing the city as a Presidency Sity.
The Calcuta Municiple was formed and tha city had its first mayor.
The three vilages, in Kalikata, where Calcuta is located, came into the possesion of the British East India Company in 1690 and some scholars like to date its beginings as a major city from the construcsion of Fort Wiliam by the British in 1698, though this is debated.
From 1858 to 1912, Calcuta was the capital of British India.
From 1912 to India's Independence in 1947, it was the capital of al of Bengal.
After Independence, Calcuta remened the capital of the Indiyan state of West Bengal.
In 1727, on the order of King George I, a civil court was set up in the city.